@c This file is part of Libmtx.
@c Copyright (C) 2022 James D. Trotter
@c
@c Libmtx is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify it
@c under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
@c the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
@c (at your option) any later version.
@c
@c Libmtx is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
@c WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
@c MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
@c General Public License for more details.
@c
@c You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
@c along with Libmtx.  If not, see <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
@c
@c Authors: James D. Trotter <james@simula.no>
@c Last modified: 2022-01-20
@c
@c Libmtx User Guide: Installing Libmtx.

@node Installing Libmtx
@chapter Installing Libmtx

@cindex installing

Libmtx uses GNU Autotools, which means that a basic build on a
UNIX-like system can be done by running the commands

@example
@code{./configure
make}
@end example

@noindent
To run some tests, use the command

@example
@code{make check}
@end example

@noindent
Finally, install the programs and library with

@example
@code{make install}
@end example

If you experience problems, please report them to
@email{james@@simula.no}. See @ref{Reporting bugs} for information on
what to include in a bug report.

@menu
* Optional dependencies:: Other software that may be used by Libmtx.
* Reporting bugs:: How to usefully report bugs.
@end menu

@node Optional dependencies
@section Optional dependencies

Some features of Libmtx are optional and will only be available if
some of the following dependencies are provided:

@itemize
@cindex MPI
@item @emph{MPI}
is needed for distributed-memory parallel matrices and vectors.

@cindex BLAS
@item @emph{BLAS}
is needed for various linear algebra operations. Different
implementations may be used, such as the netlib reference BLAS,
OpenBLAS, BLIS, and so on.

@cindex zlib
@item @emph{zlib} (@indicateurl{https://www.zlib.net/})
is needed for reading and writing gzip-compressed Matrix Market files.

@cindex libpng
@item @emph{libpng} (@indicateurl{http://www.libpng.org/pub/png/libpng.html})
is needed for writing PNG images of matrix sparsity patterns.
@end itemize


@node Reporting bugs
@section Reporting bugs

@cindex bug reporting
@cindex problems
@cindex reporting bugs

To report bugs, suggest enhancements or otherwise discuss
Libmtx, please send electronic mail to
@email{james@@simula.no}.

@cindex checklist for bug reports
For bug reports, please include enough information for the maintainers
to reproduce the problem.  Generally speaking, that means:

@itemize @bullet
@item The version numbers of Libmtx (which you can find by running
      @w{@samp{mtxinfo --version}}) and any other program(s) or
      manual(s) involved.
@item Hardware and operating system names and versions.
@item The contents of any input files necessary to reproduce the bug.
@item The expected behavior and/or output.
@item A description of the problem and samples of any erroneous output.
@item Options you gave to @command{configure} other than specifying
      installation directories.
@item Anything else that you think would be helpful.
@end itemize

When in doubt whether something is needed or not, include it. It's
better to include too much than to leave out something important.

@c @cindex patches, contributing
@c Patches are welcome. Please follow the existing coding style.
