@c This file is part of Libmtx.
@c Copyright (C) 2022 James D. Trotter
@c
@c Libmtx is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify it
@c under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
@c the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
@c (at your option) any later version.
@c
@c Libmtx is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
@c WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
@c MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
@c General Public License for more details.
@c
@c You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
@c along with Libmtx.  If not, see <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
@c
@c Authors: James D. Trotter <james@simula.no>
@c Last modified: 2022-01-07
@c
@c Libmtx User Guide: Introduction to Libmtx.

@node Introduction to Libmtx
@chapter Introduction to Libmtx

Libmtx is a C library and a collection of utility programs designed
for high-performance, parallel and distributed linear algebra. These
tools rely heavily on the Matrix Market file format, a commonly used,
human-readable text file format for storing both dense and sparse
matrices and vectors. This provides many, common linear algebra
primitives to be used directly from the command line, and for data to
be easily exchanged.

@cindex sparse matrix
Matrices and vectors are basic objects of numerical linear algebra and
thus appear in most fields of science. In particular, sparse matrices,
where most of the entries are zero, are especially important for
representing sparse graphs and for solving partial differential
equations, to name just two examples. Sparse matrices require methods
that are different from those used with dense matrices, but, in
return, they often result in significantly fewer arithmetic operations
to be carried out, as well as lower memory footprint and memory
bandwidth usage.


@section Background

@cindex Matrix Market
@cindex mmio
@cindex Matrix Market I/O library for ANSI C
The @cite{Matrix Market} (@ref{National Institute of Standards and
Technology [NIST] (2007)}) is a repository of test data that has been
used to study and compare various algorithms for numerical linear
algebra. It was originally designed and developed by R. Boisvert,
R. Pozo, K. Remington, R. Barrett and J.J. Dongarra, and first became
available online in February 1996.


@cindex Matrix Market format
The Matrix Market data set was made available in the Matrix Market
file format, which was initially described in the paper @cite{The
Matrix Market Formats: Initial Design} (@ref{R.F. Boisvert@comma{}
R. Pozo and K. Remington (1996)}). There is also a reference software
for reading and writing Matrix Market files, known as @dfn{mmio}, or
the ANSI C library for Matrix Market I/O, (@ref{National Institute of
Standards and Technology [NIST] (2000)}).

@cindex SuiteSparse Matrix Collection
More recently, the @cite{SuiteSparse Matrix Collection}
(@url{https://sparse.tamu.edu/}) has become a large, widely used
repository of sparse matrices from numerous application domains. These
matrices are also distributed in the Matrix Market format.


@section How to Use This Manual
To familiarise yourself with the Matrix Market file format, read
@ref{Matrix Market format}. If you need to install Libmtx yourself,
you should read @ref{Installing Libmtx}. If you want to learn how to
use the Libmtx C library to work with Matrix Market files, refer to
@ref{Matrix Market files}. To learn how to use matrices and vectors
for basic linear algebra, refer to @ref{Matrices and vectors}. If you
are working in a distributed-memory setting and would like to use
distributed matrices and vectors, see @ref{Distributed Matrix Market
files} and @ref{Distributed matrices and vectors}. If you would like
to get an overview of the command-line programs included in Libmtx,
then you should read @ref{Commands}.
