\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c This file is part of libmtx.
@c Copyright (C) 2022 James D. Trotter
@c
@c libmtx is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify it
@c under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
@c the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
@c (at your option) any later version.
@c
@c libmtx is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
@c WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
@c MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
@c General Public License for more details.
@c
@c You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
@c along with libmtx.  If not, see <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
@c
@c Authors: James D. Trotter <james@simula.no>
@c Last modified: 2022-01-05
@c
@c libmtx User Guide.

@c %**start of header
@setfilename libmtx.info
@include version.texi
@settitle libmtx User Guide @value{VERSION}
@c %**end of header

@copying
This manual describes how to install and use libmtx, version
@value{VERSION}, @value{UPDATED}, a C library and collection of
utility programs for working with objects in the Matrix Market file
format, including vectors, dense matrices and sparse matrices.

Copyright @copyright{} 2022 James D. Trotter

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, with no Front-Cover Texts, and with no Back-Cover
Texts.  A copy of the license is included in the section entitled
``GNU Free Documentation License''.
@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory Mathematics
@direntry
* libmtx: (libmtx).         C library and utility programs for working with Matrix Market files.
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title libmtx User Guide
@subtitle for version @value{VERSION}, @value{UPDATED}
@author James D. Trotter (@email{james@@simula.no})
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top libmtx

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@iftex
@contents
@end iftex

@menu
* Copying:: libmtx Copying Conditions (GPLv3).
* Introduction to libmtx:: Brief introduction to libmtx.
* Installing libmtx:: How to configure and compile libmtx.
* Reporting Bugs:: How to usefully report bugs.
* Matrix Market file format:: Description of the Matrix Market format.
* Matrix Market files:: Working with Matrix Market files.
* Matrices and vectors:: Working with matrices and vectors.
* Distributed matrices and vectors:: Working with matrices and vectors in distributed memory.
* Commands:: Command-line tools for Matrix Market files.
* C library reference:: Reference for the C library data types and functions.

* References:: List of useful references.
* GNU Free Documentation License:: Copying and sharing this documentation.
* General index:: Index of general concepts.
* Function index:: Index of functions.
* Data type index:: Index of data type.
* Program index:: Index of programs.
@end menu


@node Copying
@unnumbered libmtx Copying Conditions

libmtx is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the
Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or (at your
option) any later version.

libmtx is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License
for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with libmtx.  If not, see <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.


@include introduction.texi
@include installing.texi
@include reporting_bugs.texi
@include matrix_market_file_format.texi
@include matrix_market_files.texi
@include matrices_and_vectors.texi
@include distributed_matrices_and_vectors.texi
@include commands.texi
@include c_library_reference.texi
@include references.texi

@node GNU Free Documentation License
@appendix GNU Free Documentation License

@include fdl.texi

@node General index
@unnumbered General index
@printindex cp

@node Function index
@unnumbered Function index
@printindex fn

@node Data type index
@unnumbered Data type index
@printindex tp

@node Program index
@unnumbered Program index
@printindex pg

@bye
