@c This file is part of libmtx.
@c Copyright (C) 2021 James D. Trotter
@c
@c libmtx is free software: you can redistribute it and/or
@c modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
@c published by the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the
@c License, or (at your option) any later version.
@c
@c libmtx is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
@c but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
@c MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
@c General Public License for more details.
@c
@c You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
@c along with libmtx.  If not, see
@c <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
@c
@c Authors: James D. Trotter <james@simula.no>
@c Last modified: 2021-06-18
@c
@c libmtx User Guide: References.

@node References
@unnumbered References

@itemize
@item @anchor{R.F. Boisvert@comma{} R. Pozo and K. Remington (1996)}
Ronald F. Boisvert, Roldan Pozo, and Karin Remington. @cite{The Matrix
Market exchange formats: Initial design}. Technical Report NISTIR
5935, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg,
MD, USA, December 1996.

@item @anchor{National Institute of Standards and Technology [NIST] (2007)}
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). @cite{Matrix
Market}. Mathematical and Computational Sciences Division, Information
Technology Laboratory, NIST, 10 May
2007. @url{https://math.nist.gov/MatrixMarket/index.html}.

@item @anchor{National Institute of Standards and Technology [NIST] (2000)}
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). @cite{ANSI C
library for Matrix Market I/O}. Mathematical and Computational
Sciences Division, Information Technology Laboratory, NIST, 2 May
2000. @url{https://math.nist.gov/MatrixMarket/mmio-c.html}.

@item @anchor{T. Davis@comma{} Y. Hu and S. Kolodziej (2021)}
Tim Davis, Yifan Hu, and Scott Kolodziej. @cite{SuiteSparse Matrix
Collection}. Computer Science and Engineering Department, Texas A&M
University. @url{https://sparse.tamu.edu/}.

@item @anchor{E. Cuthill and J. McKee (1969)}
E. Cuthill and J. McKee. @cite{Reducing the bandwidth of sparse
symmetric matrices}. Proc. 24th Nat. Conf. ACM, pages 157–172, 1969.

@item @anchor{J.A. George and J. W-H. Liu (1981)}
J. A. George and J. W-H. Liu, @cite{Computer Solution of Large Sparse
Positive Definite Systems}, Prentice-Hall, 1981.

@item @anchor{OpenBLAS}
Zhang Xianyi, @cite{OpenBLAS}. @url{https://www.openblas.net/}.

@item @anchor{J.D. McCalpin (2013)}
J. D. McCalpin @cite{STREAM: Sustainable Memory Bandwidth in High
Performance Computers}. Department of Computer Science School of
Engineering and Applied Science, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, Virginia. June 9, 2020.
@url{https://www.cs.virginia.edu/stream/}.

@end itemize
