@c This file is part of libmtx.
@c Copyright (C) 2021 James D. Trotter
@c
@c libmtx is free software: you can redistribute it and/or
@c modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
@c published by the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the
@c License, or (at your option) any later version.
@c
@c libmtx is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
@c but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
@c MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
@c General Public License for more details.
@c
@c You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
@c along with libmtx.  If not, see
@c <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
@c
@c Authors: James D. Trotter <james@simula.no>
@c Last modified: 2021-06-18
@c
@c libmtx User Guide: Reporting bugs.

@node Reporting Bugs
@chapter Reporting Bugs

@cindex bug reporting
@cindex problems
@cindex reporting bugs

To report bugs, suggest enhancements or otherwise discuss
libmtx, please send electronic mail to
@email{james@@simula.no}.

@cindex checklist for bug reports
For bug reports, please include enough information for the maintainers
to reproduce the problem.  Generally speaking, that means:

@itemize @bullet
@item The version numbers of libmtx (which you can find by running
      @w{@samp{mtxinfo --version}}) and any other program(s) or
      manual(s) involved.
@item Hardware and operating system names and versions.
@item The contents of any input files necessary to reproduce the bug.
@item The expected behavior and/or output.
@item A description of the problem and samples of any erroneous output.
@item Options you gave to @command{configure} other than specifying
      installation directories.
@item Anything else that you think would be helpful.
@end itemize

When in doubt whether something is needed or not, include it.  It's
better to include too much than to leave out something important.

@cindex patches, contributing
Patches are welcome; if possible, please make them with @samp{@w{diff
-c}} (@pxref{Top,, Overview, diff, Comparing and Merging Files}) and
include @file{ChangeLog} entries (@pxref{Change Log,,, emacs, The GNU
Emacs Manual}).  Please follow the existing coding style.
